OBSDOCS-236 - example-core-monitoring-post-install-setup-scenario (#60288)
openshift/openshift-docs: observability/monitoring/common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios"]

> = Common monitoring configuration scenarios

Author: Good catch! I'd like to leave the main heading as is and use gerunds for subheadings, so I've implemented that change

include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios

toc::[]

The default platform monitoring stack is available for use after installing {product-title}.
The in-cluster stack includes the core platform Prometheus instance that collects metrics from your cluster and the core Alertmanager instance that routes alerts.

In addition to core platform monitoring, you can also optionally xref:../monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[enable monitoring for user-defined projects] for user workload monitoring.
After doing so, users can then monitor their own services and workloads without the need for an additional monitoring solution.

> Depending on which users will use the monitoring stack and for what purposes, as a cluster administrator, you can configure monitoring components to suit the needs of different users in various scenarios.

Author: changed

> Depending on which users will use the monitoring stack and for what purposes, as a cluster administrator, you can configure monitoring components to suit the needs of different users in various scenarios.

Author: Moved per your suggestion

[id="core-platform-monitoring-first-steps_{context}"]

> == Core platform monitoring: First steps

Author: Adding `Configuring` to the beginning

After {product-title} is installed, cluster administrators typically perform certain basic activities to configure core platform monitoring to suit their needs.

> These activities include configuring options for Prometheus and Alertmanager, setting up short-term and long-term storage, and adding service monitors.

Reviewer: except Prometheus and Alertmanager, we can also configure  other components
as for `adding service monitors`, I think  it there is something wrong with the added service monitors by users, Red Hat does not have the duty to fix it. need developer help to confirm

Reviewer 2: For the Core platform side of things, ServiceMonitors are out of scope. I would just drop this part here since we don't support ServiceMonitor additions by [admin] users.

I think e can also drop `short-term [storage]`. Out of the box Prometheus will store data in the container file system. When the pod is restarted that data is lost. I assume that is what short-term storage means here? If so there is no setup required.

Author: removed the service monitor bit and just said `setting up storage`

> When you have completed these configuration activities, users can query and view collected metrics and receive alerts.

Reviewer 2: _Nit_ Metrics viewing and querying works out of the box. Only an alert receiver must be configured in order to receive the alert notifications.

Author: Reworded to make this clear. Also added a clarifying note to the beginning

> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#granting-users-permission-to-monitor-user-defined-projects_enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[Assign monitoring cluster roles] to any non-administrator users that need to access certain monitoring features.

Author: Yeah, Michael Ryan Peter gave me the idea.

> The `monitoring-edit` cluster role permits users to create alerts and to create, modify, and delete `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` resources to scrape metrics from services and pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `monitoring-edit` cluster role permits users to create alerts and to create, modify, and delete `ServiceMonitor`, `prometheusrules`  and `PodMonitor` resources to scrape metrics from services and pods.
```
see from
```
$ oc get clusterrole monitoring-edit -oyaml
...
rules:
- apiGroups:
  - monitoring.coreos.com
  resources:
  - servicemonitors
  - podmonitors
  - prometheusrules
  verbs:
  - '*'
```

Reviewer 2: Please note https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#support-considerations_configuring-the-monitoring-stack

Perhaps we should add a note that this targets UWM specifically and not the platform part?

Author: Changed to say:

`The `monitoring-edit` cluster role permits users to create alerts and to create, modify, and delete `ServiceMonitor`, `PrometheusRules` and `PodMonitor` resources to scrape metrics from services and pods for user-defined projects only.`

> The `alert-routing-edit` cluster role permits users to route alerts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `alert-routing-edit` cluster role permits users to add alert notification routes to external systems.
```
Maybe link to https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.html#sending-notifications-to-external-systems_managing-alerts?

Author: fixed

> The `alert-routing-edit` cluster role permits users to route alerts.

Author: Good point. Plus, we don't want to maintain this info in two places. Deleted

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#creating-cluster-monitoring-configmap_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[Create the `cluster-monitoring-config` `ConfigMap` object] if it does not exist.

> * If needed, xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#assigning-tolerations-to-monitoring-components_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[assign tolerations] to monitoring stack components to enable moving them to tainted nodes.

Author: Agree. Removed

> * If needed, xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#setting-the-body-size-limit-for-metrics-scraping_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[set the body size limit] for metrics collection to help avoid situations in which Prometheus consumes excessive amounts of memory when scraped targets return a response that contains a large amount of data.

Author: Removed

> * For short-term data retention, xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#configuring-persistent-storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[configure persistent storage] by creating Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) to provision persistent storage volumes (PVs).

Reviewer: `For short-term data retention`
maybe should
`For long-term data retention`?

> * For short-term data retention, xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#configuring-persistent-storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[configure persistent storage] by creating Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) to provision persistent storage volumes (PVs).

Author: Agree. Removed.

> Configure these PVs to be used by Prometheus to store metrics data and by Alertmanager to store alert data. Specify the metrics data retention parameters for Prometheus and Thanos Ruler.

Author: Good edit! Changed

+
[NOTE]
====

> By default, a newly installed {product-title} system is configured to fire an alert named `PodStartupStorageOperationsFailing` to remind you that storage is not configured.

Reviewer: did not find `PodStartupStorageOperationsFailing` alert
```
$ oc get pv
No resources found

$ token=`oc create token prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring`
$ oc -n openshift-monitoring exec -c prometheus prometheus-k8s-0 -- curl -k -H "Authorization: Bearer $token" 'https://thanos-querier.openshift-monitoring.svc:9091/api/v1/query?' --data-urlencode 'query=ALERTS{alertname="PodStartupStorageOperationsFailing"}' | jq
{
  "status": "success",
  "data": {
    "resultType": "vector",
    "result": [],
    "analysis": {}
  }
}
```
maybe you meant if we don't configure PV for prometheus, there's PrometheusDataPersistenceNotConfigured message in clusteroperator monitoring?
```
$ oc get clusteroperator monitoring -oyaml
...
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-07-17T00:18:44Z"
    message: 'Prometheus is running without persistent storage which can lead to data
      loss during upgrades and cluster disruptions. Please refer to the official documentation
      to see how to configure storage for Prometheus: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html'
    reason: PrometheusDataPersistenceNotConfigured
    status: "False"
    type: Degraded
```

Author: Changed to:

`By default, in a newly installed {product-title} system, the `ClusterOperator` resource reports a `PrometheusDataPersistenceNotConfigured` status message to remind you that storage is not configured.`

You can resolve this alert on the *Alerts* tab in the *Observe* -> *Alerting* section of the {product-title} web console.
====
+

> * If needed, for long-term data retention, xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#configuring_remote_write_storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[configure the remote write feature] to enable Prometheus to send ingested metrics to remote systems for storage.

Author: removed

> Be sure to xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#adding-cluster-id-labels-to-metrics_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[add cluster ID labels to metrics] for use with your remote write storage configuration.

Author: added it as an Important admonition

> * If needed, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#managing-core-platform-alerting-rules_managing-alerts[modify or create alerting rules] for your cluster by defining alerting rules for different conditions based on metrics and labels.

Author: Excellent edit! Changed

These rules specify the conditions that trigger alerts, such as high CPU or memory usage, network latency, and so forth.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#sending-notifications-to-external-systems_managing-alerts[Configure alert receivers] so that Alertmanager can send alerts to an external notification system such as email, Slack, or PagerDuty.

> * If needed, xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#managing-cpu-and-memory-resources-for-monitoring-components[specify resource limits and requests for monitoring components] to ensure that the containers that run monitoring components have enough CPU and memory resources.

Author: changed

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#managing-metrics[Configure service monitors], which define the set of services and endpoints that Prometheus scrapes for metrics.

> Create these `ServiceMonitor` resources for each service you want to monitor.

Reviewer: is it for user project monitoring?

Reviewer 2: Yes, configuring ServiceMonitors (or PrometheusRules) for the platform prometheus is unsupported.

Author: deleted

> Create these `ServiceMonitor` resources for each service you want to monitor.

Reviewer 3: I think this is only for UWM?

Author: Correct. Good catch. Deleted

> These resources specify the labels that identify the target services and the scraping configuration, including the endpoint paths and HTTP ports to scrape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These resources specify the labels that identify the target services and the scraping configuration, including the endpoint paths and ports to scrape.
```
HTTPS also can have ports

Author: deleted

> With the monitoring stack configured to suit your needs, Prometheus will start scraping metrics from the specified services and storing these metrics.

Reviewer 2: Prometheus will scrape metrics without any configuration as described above.

Author: Added a note to clarify this

> You can now go to the *Observe* pages in the {product-title} web console to view and query collected metrics, manage alerts, identify performance bottlenecks, and scale resources as needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now go to the *Observe* pages in the {product-title} administrator web console to view and query collected metrics, manage alerts, identify performance bottlenecks, and scale resources as needed:
```

> With the monitoring stack configured to suit your needs, Prometheus will start scraping metrics from the specified services and storing these metrics.
> You can now go to the *Observe* pages in the {product-title} web console to view and query collected metrics, manage alerts, identify performance bottlenecks, and scale resources as needed:

Reviewer 3: I think a lot of this can be shortened because we add links to the sections that explain how to view and query metrics:
```suggestion
With the monitoring stack configured to suit your needs, Prometheus scrapes metrics from the specified services and stores these metrics. You can now view and query collected metrics, manage alerts, identify performance bottlenecks, and scale resources as needed:
```

Author: good one. changed

> * You can xref:../../observability/monitoring/reviewing-monitoring-dashboards.adoc#reviewing-monitoring-dashboards[view dashboards] to visualize collected metrics, troubleshoot alerts, and monitor other information about your cluster.

Reviewer: the last 2 lines are commented out

> * You can xref:../../observability/monitoring/reviewing-monitoring-dashboards.adoc#reviewing-monitoring-dashboards[view dashboards] to visualize collected metrics, troubleshoot alerts, and monitor other information about your cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/reviewing-monitoring-dashboards.adoc#reviewing-monitoring-dashboards[View dashboards] to visualize collected metrics, troubleshoot alerts, and monitor other information about your cluster.
```

Author: changed

> * You can xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#about-querying-metrics_managing-metrics[query collected metrics] by creating PromQL queries or using predefined queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#about-querying-metrics_managing-metrics[Query collected metrics] by creating PromQL queries or using predefined queries.
```

Author: changed

[id="common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios"]
= Common monitoring configuration scenarios
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios

toc::[]

After {product-title} is installed, core platform monitoring components immediately begin collecting metrics, which you can query and view.
The default in-cluster monitoring stack includes the core platform Prometheus instance that collects metrics from your cluster and the core Alertmanager instance that routes alerts, among other components.
Depending on who will use the monitoring stack and for what purposes, as a cluster administrator, you can further configure these monitoring components to suit the needs of different users in various scenarios.

In addition to core platform monitoring, you can also optionally xref:../monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[enable monitoring for user-defined projects] for user workload monitoring.
Users can then monitor their own services and workloads without the need for an additional monitoring solution.

[id="configuring-core-platform-monitoring-first-steps_{context}"]

> == Configuring core platform monitoring: First steps

Reviewer 4: Just a suggestion: the wording of this title made me think that there might be "second steps" or "next steps". It might be helpful to change it to avoid this confusion. Maybe something like, "Configuring core platform monitoring: post-installation steps" or something similar.

Author: The plan is to add a few more "advanced" scenarios eventually as part of ContentX work, but I think you make a valid point. I'll adjust the wording for now until we have this other content added. Thanks!

> After {product-title} is installed, cluster administrators typically perform certain basic activities to configure core platform monitoring to suit their needs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After {product-title} is installed, cluster administrators typically configure core platform monitoring to suit their needs.
```

Author: Changed per your suggestion

> After {product-title} is installed, cluster administrators typically perform certain basic activities to configure core platform monitoring to suit their needs.

Reviewer 4: If this is a post-installation activity that customers are expected to do, it might be helpful to add it somewhere in the Post-installation configuration book. I see that we do tell customers to configure alerts and notifications as part of post-installation configuration (which is also mentioned in this assembly in the common scenarios); do we need to expand that to include all of the monitoring configuration scenarios that are highlighted here?

Author: That's something to think about, for sure. But it's outside the scope of this PR. I'll write up a separate Jira to explore possible solutions to address this question. Thanks!

Specify the metrics data retention parameters for Prometheus and Thanos Ruler.
+
[NOTE]
====
By default, in a newly installed {product-title} system, the monitoring `ClusterOperator` resource reports a `PrometheusDataPersistenceNotConfigured` status message to remind you that storage is not configured.
====
+
* For longer term data retention, xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#configuring_remote_write_storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[configure the remote write feature] to enable Prometheus to send ingested metrics to remote systems for storage.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Be sure to xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#adding-cluster-id-labels-to-metrics_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[add cluster ID labels to metrics] for use with your remote write storage configuration.
====
+
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#granting-users-permission-to-monitor-user-defined-projects_enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[Assign monitoring cluster roles] to any non-administrator users that need to access certain monitoring features.

> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#assigning-tolerations-to-monitoring-components_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[Assign tolerations] to monitoring stack components to enable moving them to tainted nodes.

Reviewer 4: I think this reads a bit easier, though I'm not sure if it is technically correct:

```suggestion
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#assigning-tolerations-to-monitoring-components_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[Assign tolerations] to monitoring stack components so that administrators can move them to tainted nodes.
```

Author: Changed per your suggestion

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios"]
= Common monitoring configuration scenarios
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios

toc::[]

> After {product-title} is installed, core platform monitoring components immediately begins collecting metrics, which you can query and view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After {product-title} is installed, core platform monitoring components immediately begin collecting metrics, which you can query and view.
```

Author: fixed

The default in-cluster monitoring stack includes the core platform Prometheus instance that collects metrics from your cluster and the core Alertmanager instance that routes alerts, among other components.
Depending on who will use the monitoring stack and for what purposes, as a cluster administrator, you can further configure these monitoring components to suit the needs of different users in various scenarios.

[NOTE]
====
In addition to core platform monitoring, you can also optionally xref:../monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[enable monitoring for user-defined projects] for user workload monitoring.
Users can then monitor their own services and workloads without the need for an additional monitoring solution.
====

[id="configuring-core-platform-monitoring-first-steps_{context}"]
== Configuring core platform monitoring: First steps

After {product-title} is installed, cluster administrators typically perform certain basic activities to configure core platform monitoring to suit their needs.

> These activities include setting up storage amd configuring options for Prometheus, Alertmanager, and other monitoring components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These activities include setting up storage and configuring options for Prometheus, Alertmanager, and other monitoring components.
```

Author: Good catch. fixed

[NOTE]
====
By default, in a newly installed {product-title} system, users can query and view collected metrics.
You need only configure an alert receiver if you want users to receive alert notifications.
Any other configuration options listed here are optional.
====

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#creating-cluster-monitoring-configmap_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[Create the `cluster-monitoring-config` `ConfigMap` object] if it does not exist.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#sending-notifications-to-external-systems_managing-alerts[Configure alert receivers] so that Alertmanager can send alerts to an external notification system such as email, Slack, or PagerDuty.
* For shorter term data retention, xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#configuring-persistent-storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[configure persistent storage] for Prometheus and Alertmanager to store metrics and alert data.
Specify the metrics data retention parameters for Prometheus and Thanos Ruler.
+
[NOTE]
====

> By default, in a newly installed {product-title} system, the `ClusterOperator` resource reports a `PrometheusDataPersistenceNotConfigured` status message to remind you that storage is not configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, in a newly installed {product-title} system, the monitoring `ClusterOperator` resource reports a `PrometheusDataPersistenceNotConfigured` status message to remind you that storage is not configured.
```
add `monitoring` explicitly

Reviewer 2: I agree here. `ClusterOperator` is a term used by CVO and in its API definitions (see https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/2d2b0250232a9b227f938d7d7172d04d78a681ee/dev-guide/cluster-version-operator/dev/clusteroperator.md?plain=1#L31). Using this here could be confusing.

We create a `ClusterOperator` object with the name `monitoring`. So +1 to Junqis suggestion.

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#setting-the-body-size-limit-for-metrics-scraping_configuring-the-monitoring-stack[Set the body size limit] for metrics collection to help avoid situations in which Prometheus consumes excessive amounts of memory when scraped targets return a response that contains a large amount of data.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#managing-core-platform-alerting-rules_managing-alerts[Modify or create alerting rules] for your cluster.
These rules specify the conditions that trigger alerts, such as high CPU or memory usage, network latency, and so forth.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.adoc#managing-cpu-and-memory-resources-for-monitoring-components[Specify resource limits and requests for monitoring components] to ensure that the containers that run monitoring components have enough CPU and memory resources.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#managing-metrics[Configure service monitors], which define the set of services and endpoints that Prometheus scrapes for metrics.

> These resources specify the labels that identify the target services and the scraping configuration, including the endpoint paths and ports to scrape.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this part adds confusion in this section. We explicitly state this is unsupported for the platform stack (https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#support-considerations_configuring-the-monitoring-stack) and the linked section talks about UWM.
Is there any reason to not remove this bit?

Author: Excellent point. Removed the item from the list
